
Roman Citizenship
I In ancient Rome, not everyone was a Roman citizen. only a select few possessed that honor along with the power and privileges that went with it. As first the republic, and later the empire, expanded, the right to citizenship also expanded. Rome's leaders often used the promise of citizenship to attract allies to their side. Ultimately, on the empire's frontier, the Romans frequently assimilated barbarians by a Romanization process which made them citizens of the empire that had conquered their people.
only males could have Roman citizenship as a woman was placed first under the rule of her father and then her husband. The state automatically conferred citizenship to all males born to a citizen. Slaves became partial citizens upon being emancipated by their masters, but the state granted a freed slave's sons full citizenship. During Rome's early years, those in the Latin provinces in the Italian mainland were first partial citizens and later became full citizens. This practice spread as Rome's holdings did, and, eventually, virtually all free males in the empire possessed some form of partial or full citizenship.
3 Along with citizenship came several rights and obligations. Roman citizens could vote and hold political office. Only citizens could own property and make business contracts. Furthermore, they had the right to sue someone, and only they could be sued. Citizens had the right to a fair trial and the right to appeal a court's verdict. The state did not enforce corporal punishment on citizens, who could only be sentenced to death for treason against the state. For these rights, citizens had to offer themselves as soldiers in the Roman army for a period of time. During times of emergency, the state offered citizenship to freemen willing to join the army.
On the empire's frontiers were many barbarian tribes that often threatened war. Rome's leaders decided to absorb them into the empire by offering their leaders Roman citizenship, and, at times, every male in certain tribes was granted citizenship. Some historians believe this practice eventually weakened the empire while others claim it strengthened Rome and delayed its collapse by several centuries. As Roman citizens, these former barbarians and their descendants fought as Romans, not as allies with no stake in the empire's fate. In the end, though, the granting of citizenship was not enough when unassimilated barbarians overran and conquered Rome itself in the late fifth century.

Glossary
assimilate: to absorb; to make one similar to another thing
treason: betrayal; treachery, typically against a government
