Mastering
the
Subject
Athens and Sparta
Athens and Sparta were the greatest city-states in ancient Greece. Occasionally
allies yet frequently enemies, their rivalry shaped much of classical Greek history. In
modern history books, Sparta's reputation is that of a ruthless, slave-owning military
state while Athens is praised for being a shining example of early democracy and
meritocracy. While both points have merit, neither is exactly true as each city could,
at times, resemble the reputation that was traditionally accorded to the other.
2 Sparta was the preeminent land power in Greece in the fifth century B.C.,
which was when the Spartan-Athenian rivalry was at its peak. Spartan men were
trained in the use of combat arms since childhood, and the Greeks considered
the Spartan army the most formidable in the land. • Sparta was also unique in
that it had a standing army which was ready to go to war instantly. • Athens, like
most Greek city-states, depended on its mass of landowning men who wielded
political power and thus owed military service to the state when called upon. •
Additionally, Athens was more accomplished in naval warfare, and it was at sea that
the Athenians were usually the masters of the Spartans. •
Sparta was able to maintain a professional standing army thanks to the unusual
nature of its economic organization. Spartans did not engage in agriculture but
instead depended on a vast horde of peasant slaves, called helots, to farm the
land and provide them with food. The Spartans kept the more numerous helots
in servitude; naturally, the helots were constantly eager to rebel—another
reason why Sparta maintained a standing army. Athens had its own share of lower
classes, mostly poor farmers, craftsmen, and laborers, but they were primarily free
men. Contrary to popular belief, Athenians practiced slavery—as did most ancient
societies—but nowhere near the degree the Spartans did.
Despite treating their slaves so harshly, the Spartans were enlightened in at
least one way: Spartan women were considered equals with men, and they took
part in politics and even had some military training. The logic behind this was that
women were needed to help raise strong warriors from childhood. Indeed, Spartan
women were no wilting flowers when it came to feats of arms. On the other hand,
in Athens, the so-called birthplace of democracy, women had no voice in politics,
and Athenian men expected their women to maintain the home and to do nothing
else. Even when men without property were later given rights in Athenian politics,
women still remained excluded from participation in the political arena.
Artistically, the Athenians were far more accomplished than the Spartans
Craftsmen constructed the great Athenian buildings that remain standing today.
In literature, philosophy, science, and history, no Spartan ever compared to the
Athenians While Athens earned its reputation in numerous fields, Sparta's rests
solely on its military triumphs. Yet even the Spartans could be defeated as the
Thebans, led by Epaminondas, crushed them in the early fourth century B.C.,
leading to the long decline of Spartan society. Today, Athens is the capital of Greece
while Sparta is but a part of its history.

