Actual
TOEFL
The Legacy of Jamestown
I Jamestown was the first successful British colony in the New World, but its early years were
disastrous. However, its transition from a failing, disease-ridden economic venture into a full-fledged
profitable colony had a resounding and lasting impact on both the New World and the indigenous
American people and their environment. Conceived as a business enterprise financed by English
merchants in search of gold, silver, and other riches, Jamestown was founded in 1607 on the shores of
the James River near Chesapeake Bay. over the next twenty years, the colony came perilously close to
being destroyed by disease, starvation, and gross incompetence. only when the colonists turned away
from their desire for quick wealth and began building a farming community based on the English
model did the colony begin to thrive. The cash crop tobacco became the gold they had been searching
for. Yet, unwittingly, the colonists would wreak havoc on the native population and the land they lived
on.
Prior to the arrival of the Jamestown colonists, the natives in the Chesapeake region were
flourishing. Around 15,000 natives—the majority belonging to the Powhatan tribe—lived in the
immediate area. The site chosen by the English colonists was empty, though, and for good reason: The
James River lacked sufficient flow in the hot summers to prevent saltwater from Chesapeake Bay from
entering as far inland as the new settlement. Since the colonists were inept at handling their human
waste and dead, the waters near Jamestown became a salty, disease-ridden cesspool. • Colonists often
succumbed to dysentery and numerous other water-borne illnesses during Jamestown's first few years.
• Of the approximately 6,000 people who came to Jamestown between 1607 and 1624, almost seventy-
five percent died. The local native leaders could have easily wiped them out at any time yet failed to
press their advantage, believing that the colonists would soon give up and abandon their efforts.
3 The natives lived off the land, managing their crops and fishing and hunting grounds, so the
land and sea provided them a renewable bounty. Corn, squash, and beans were cultivated together,
and the nitrogen-replenishing beans kept the soil fertile and moist. When crop yields became low, the
natives abandoned their fields and cleared trees for new plots. They erected no fences to denote land
ownership, nor did they have any large domestic animals other than dogs. In contrast, the colonists,
when they began farming, followed the English practices of fencing and land ownership. For them,
open land was free for animal grazing, and the cows, pigs, goats, and sheep they brought frequently
destroyed native crops. Soon, the countryside was filled with fenced lands, keeping the natives from;
their traditional plots and hunting grounds and causing great tension between both sides;
4 When the colonists arrived, they brought other instruments of change, many of which
negatively altered the land. Chief among these were worms, which were uncommon in the Americas
before the arrival of the Europeans. Worms destroyed the dead leaves and other vegetation on the
forest floors, which had previously replenished the soil. However, other insects they introduced
provided some benefits. These included bees, which spread pollen and let new plants grow far and wide.
Still, the natives did not regard the bees as a boon but as a sign that the colonists were not far behind.
5 The English decision to start systematically planting and selling tobacco caused the major
change in the fortunes of the colony and America itself. Virginia tobacco, as it was soon called, was
sweet and smooth and became a hit in Europe. The colonists—at least those who survived—had
found their fortune after all. Land was quickly cleared, and great fields of tobacco were planted.
Unfortunately, tobacco sucks the life out of the soil in just a few years, so new lands were constantly
60 PartB

being sought and forests cut down. Simultaneously, the natives were often too weak from Old World
diseases such as smallpox and malaria, so they could offer only a token defense of their lands. Then, in
1619, the first African slaves arrived in Jamestown to work the tobacco fields, thus beginning another
long, sad chapter in American history. The legacy of Jamestown is not only as the first English colony
but also as the harbinger of change—both good and bad—for the natives and the continent itself.
Glossary
perilously: dangerously
bounty: a reward; a prize
boon: a benefit; an advantage
026
I The word indigenous in the passage is closest in meaning to
@ independent
@ native
C) unique
apparent
2 In paragraph 1, the author's description of the dangers the Jamestown colonists faced mentions all of the
following EXCEPT:
(A) They were attacked by tribes of Native Americans.
They often suffered from various illnesses.
(C) They were led by inept individuals.
@They sometimes did not have enough food to eat.
Paragraph 1 is marked with an arrow [9.
Which of the following can be inferred from paragraph 1 about the Jamestown colonists?
@ They did not intentionally set out to harm the Native Americans.
@After several years of searching, they managed to find gold and silver.
(C) The colonists never managed to overcome the diseases that afflicted them.
@ They abandoned their hopes for the colony after two decades.
Paragraph 1 is marked with an arrow [4.
The author's description of Jamestown's geographical location mentions which of the following?
@ It was located right beside Chesapeake Bay.
@ Crops did not grow well because of the hot summers there.
(C) The water in its river was sometimes rather salty.
@It was situated on land that thousands of tribes called home.