Mastering
the
Subject
James Watt and the Industrial Revolution
The modern world would not be the same without James Watt's improvements to
the steam engine. There had been steam engines before James Watt's time, but none
achieved the efficiency and practicality of Watt's improved design. His engine wound
up transforming the world and was crucial to the Industrial Revolution. Thanks)
to Watt, steam pushed and pulled the pistons and drove the wheels that turned
world from an agrarian society into the modern technologically driven one that:
exists today:
2 Watt trained as an instrument maker and worked at the University of
Glasgow during the mid-eighteenth century. While there, he became interested in
the use of steam as a source of power. He subsequently built some steam engine
models which barely worked, and he also worked on the Newcomen steam engine,
a type that had its own problems. Watt studied his creations until he discovered why
they had failed to produce much energy. The result was that he invented a key device
crucial to a practical steam engine: a condenser that cooled the steam even while the
cylinder was hot. This enabled his steam engine to be four times more efficient than
those currently in use.
Coal miners during Watt's time used early steam engines to pump water out
of deep mines. The engines used low-pressure steam and operated on a vacuum
principle to move a piston back and forth. Watt, however, was interested in
developing steam engines for use in factories. He installed the first practical factory
steam engine in 1776 and changed the way the world worked. Factory steam engines
allowed more work to be accomplished in less time. In addition, they were not
dependent on falling water as a power source, so factories could be built anywhere.
Finally, steam engine-powered factories needed workers, and the mass movement
of people from the English countryside to expanding urban centers was the result.
Within fifty years, steam power had transformed England from a countryside
cottage industry and agrarian society to a factory-based urban-dwelling industrial
powerhouse.
The world soon transformed as well, with Watt's steam engines and their
improved descendents spreading abroad. The mass industrialization of Western
Europe and the United States quickly followed, and it eventually occurred in Eastern
Europe, parts of the British Empire, and Japan. By the end of the twentieth century,
industrialization was the norm. With it, though, came various issues, including
crowded cities and the numerous problems, like crime and pollution, which occur
in them. In addition, the exploitation of workers by factory owners ultimately led
to the rise of communism, socialism, and the advent of labor unions, all of which
greatly affected society.
James watt continued improving his steam engines, eventually retiring in 1800
and passing on his business to his son and others. He was still tinkering around
in his private workshop until his death in 1819. Today, he is hailed as the inventor
of the steam engine. While not literally true, it was watt's improvement of others'
creations that was the key to initiating the Industrial REvolution and shaping the modern world.