Mastering
Subject
American Western Migration
Between the 1830s and 1870s, the population of the United States west of the
Mississippi River increased dramatically. There were several reasons for this, the
foremost being the availability of cheap farmland. Additionally, gold was discovered
in California, cheaper and faster means of transportation west were established,
and there was a burgeoning immigrant population seeking its place in America.
However, the new denizens did not always have an easy time as they faced hostile
Native Americans and unscrupulous businessmen, and the land itself was often
harsh. But they persisted, so the western lands were filled with people, and the
United States was transformed.
In 1803 and 1804, when Lewis and Clark made their famous expedition to the
west coast, the land was empty except for the natives and a few white hunters and
trappers. Initially, the number of people moving west was just a trickle. The journey
was long and difficult; there were no railways, and the sailing time to California in
the days before the Panama Canal opened was measured in months. Then, in | 848,
everything changed. Men discovered gold near San Francisco, so people began
flocking there. The California Gold Rush resulted in the first large increase in the
western population. Many people found gold, yet most did not; but they stayed,
established businesses or farmed, and raised their families.
3 The land between California and the Mississippi did not see great migration
until after the Civil War, when the transcontinental railroad was completed and
cheap, fertile land became available for farming. Some people who moved west
came from the east and south to seek better, more fertile farmland. Others were
immigrants, coming from Italy, Germany, Poland, and Scandinavia. Promises of
wide-open rich land drew tens of thousands of people who moved to the great,
open plains to begin new lives. Armed clashes with natives did not deter them, nor
did problems between farmers who wanted to fence in their lands and ranchers who
wanted open plains. They lived rough and tumble lives. Towns were built and died,
lawlessness was common, and many only had their faith in religion along with the
fact that they had nowhere else to go to sustain them.
As steamboat and rail transportation reduced the costs of shipping from west
to east, more land was broken, and great fields of wheat and corn began covering
the prairies. The expectation of profits from farming drew greater numbers or
migrants, including freed slaves from the south, businessmen seeking a share of the
new wealth, and discharged war veterans looking for a fresh start, As the population
increased, the lands were eventually incorporated first as territories and then as
American states.
By 1870, one third of America's population lived in the west whereas only one
twelfth of the population had done so in 1830. The country's population had tripled
between 1830 and 1870, going from twelve million to more than thirty-eight million.
Additionally, western migration continued long after the westward rush for gold and
land. Today, California is America's most populous state, with thirty-five million
people, almost equivalent to the entire country's numbers in 1870.
flock: to move quickly; to gather quickly
deter: to discourage

Native Americans were
once commonly called
Indians, yet this name is
rarely used today and is
an offensive
term by many.
In 1803, President
Thomas Jefferson made
the Louisiana Purchase
from France. This greatly
increases the size of
the U.S. He immediately
sent the Lewis and Clark
expedition to explore
and to survey the new
land. From 1803 to 1806,
Lewis and Clark and
their men crossed the
entire continent. reach«i
the pacific Ocean, and
then went back east.
Their trip helped open
the American west to
further exploration and
settlements.
The American Civil War
lasted from 1861 to
1865. It started when I I
southern states tried to
secede from the Union.
of the war between
the North and South
was that of slavery.
Eventually, President
Abraham Lincoln freed
all Southern slaves
with the Emancipation
Proclamation in 1862.
After the war ended, the
Thirteenth Amendment
to the Constitution,
Which abolished slavery,
was ratified in 1865.