Actual
Roman Britain
I For almost 400 years. Britain belonged to the Roman Empire This profoundly changed the
island, and the legacy of the Roman period is evident even today. Many of Britain's motorways run
along old Roman roads. and virtually every major urban center is located where a Roman town once
existed. Although most of the historical record is lost, the Romans left behind a of
archaeological evidence, including buildings, roads, coins, and weapons, and a multitude of other relics
at various sites. Through an examination of these places and artifacts, researchers have produced a
2 Julius Caesar actually invaded Britain twice—in 55 and 54 B.C. as an offshoot of his campaign
to subdue Gaul - nevertheless, his forces failed to conquer it. However, his efforts produced alliances
with individual British Celtic tribal leaders, resulting in ties with Rome being established. Years later,
a full-scale Roman invasion occurred in 43 A.D., but it took several decades to defeat the numerous
tribes. In fact, the Romans never succeeded in maintaining complete control over the entire island.
Rebellions constantly up, especially in the north. Since territory in practically constant rebellion
required a large military presence, several legions, plus allied barbarian troops, were stationed in
Britain during the Roman period.
3 As the Roman military moved throughout Britain, it constructed roads and established camps.
Some became permanent settlements that included a Roman fortress as a center of defense. Among
the more famous settlements were the beginnings of modern-day London, Canterbury, York, and
Manchester. The road system was vital for ensuring the speedy transportation of troops and supplies
across the island. This infrastructure typically allowed the Romans to move quickly to a rebelling
region with enough forces to quell the uprising. The primary exception was in the north: The fierce Pict
warriors, living in the region of modern-day Scotland, refused to ally themselves with Rome, and the
Romans, despite multiple invasions and attempts at occupation, failed to conquer them. As a result,
during Emperor Hadrian's time, the Romans built the famous wall named after him as a bulwark
against the northern tribes.
Britain is far from Rome, so most Roman legionnaires posted there became permanent settlers.
They intermarried with the local population, started farms, and stayed after retirement from the
military. The locals became used to the Romans, their laws and customs were adopted, and they even
granted the honor of citizenship to some of the so-called barbarians. To encourage trade in Britain and
to maintain its standing army, the Romans transported much coinage, which was used to pay soldiers
and to purchase commodities, to the island; The coins remained in circulation and contributed to the
region's economic prosperity. Britain became one of Rome's major sources of mineral deposits and, for
some time, supplied it with much tin as well as gold, iron, lead, silver, and marble. Animal skins, furs,
timber, and wool were also prized products from Britain paid for with Roman funds.
5 The end of Roman rule in Britain was slow in coming. Some historians blame economic decline
and a decrease in the amount of circulating funds. Others place the blame on increasing barbarian
attacks and the Roman administration's inability to deal with them. The Roman army in Britain
itself underwent a series of rebellions, and, by 410 A.D., Rome had had enough and decided to part
ways with the region by refusing to send any more troops or assistance there. At some point, the new
leaders in Britain invited the Saxons from the Germanic lowlands on the European continent to assist
them in maintaining order. The Saxons, however, chose to conquer the island instead.
64 PartB

6 After their formal withdrawal. the Romans continued to influence Britain, but their power
rapidly declined. Roman buildings, aqueducts, and other structures were torn down for material
to build castles. Roads fell into disrepair, currency disappeared, and trade returned to a primitive
barter system. Even the Latin language failed to survive. All that remained from 400 years of Roman
civilization were the names of the towns, pathways of roads with but a few stones remaining, some
artifacts buried in the ground, and structures such as Hadrian's Wall, which remain to this day.
Glossary
trove: a collection
prized: valued
fund: money; currency
I
2
3
4
According to paragraph 1 , which of the following is true of Britain during the Roman Period?
There is little written evidence of the events that happened during it.
(B) The period of Roman rule in Britain began around the year 400 A.D.
@ It was a time when most of Britain's population centers contracted.
@The Romans found an enormous amount of treasure while they were there.
Paragraph 1 is marked with an arrow [4.
The word it in the passage refers to
@ Britain
(E) offshoot
@ Gaul
Rome
The phrase flared up in the passage is closest in meaning to
(S) exploded
@ started
(C) extinguished
(O) threatened
Why does the author mention Julius Caesar?
@ To note who the person that ultimately conquered Britain was
@To compare his campaign there with his other one in Gaul
@To explain why his tactics for invading Rome were unsuccessful
@To say he was responsible for the first Roman invasion of Britain