| Formany in the 1990s, supermodel Cindy Crawford
was the perfect American dream gir slim, tanned and
natural-looking, with long, shiny hair. People have described
her as The Face of the Decade’

2 But people have not always had the same ideas about
beauty, Until the 1920s, suntans were for poor people,
‘ladies’ stayed out of the sun to keep their faces as pale
as possible In the times of Queen Elizabeth | of England,
fashionable ladies even painted their faces with lead to
make them whiter — a very dangerous habit, since lead is
poisonous!

3 And people in the eighteenth century would not have
thought much of Cindy Crawford's hair! Ladies in those
days never went out without their wigs, which were so
enormous (and dirty) that it was quite common to find
mice living in them. As for the ‘perfect beauties’ painted by
Rubens in the seventeenth century, if they wanted to be
supermodels today, they would need to spend months on
a diet!



Ideas of beauty can be very different according to
where you live in the world, too, For the Paduang tribe in
South East Asia, traditionally, the most important sign of
female beauty was a long neck. So at the age of five or six
gils received their fist neck ring, and each year they added
new rings. By the time they were old enough to many,
their necks were about twenty-five centimetres long!

And what about the ideal man? If you asked people
today to name an attractive man, most of them would
mention someone lke James Bond, harison Ford, or
Denzel Washington: someone tall and athletic, brave and
manly

In the eighteenth century however, ‘manliness’ was
very different from what it is today. As well as wearing
wigs, perfume and lots of make-up, a true gentleman
showed that he had feelings by crying frequently in public.
According to one story, when the British Prime Minister,
Lord Spencer Percival, came to give King George IV
some bad news, both men sat down and cried!

‘And even now, James Bond might not find it
‘so easy to attract women if he visited the Dinka tribe of
Sudan, They have always believed in the saying that ‘big is
beautiful’. Traditionally,
each year, men
compete to win the
title of the fattest man.
The winner is sure to
find a wife quickly for
a Dinka woman, if a man is fat it is also a
sign that he is rich and powerful