In 1607, Jamestown, Virginia, was founded. It was the first permanent British settlement in Nom America. For the next century and a half, the British established thirteen colonies in America. They were all located on the east coast next to the Atlantic Ocean. During this time, large numbers of people left Britain and sailed to the Americas. By 1776, roughly two and a half million people were living in the colonies. There were three main reasons why many people departed Britain to start new lives in America. 

The first was religious freedom. There were numerous Christian sects in Britain in the 1600s and 1700s. The majority of people there belonged to the Anglican Church. But there were also many Catholics. And there were other, smaller, groups of Protestants. The 1600s was a time of religious persecution. People were killed for their religious beliefs. In 1618, the Thirty Years' War began in Europe. It was fought between Protestants and Catholics. Many people sought to escape the violence. The Pilgrims were one such group. In 1620, they fled to America on the Mayflower. They started a colony in Massachusetts. The Puritans were another group of Protestants with beliefs similar to those of the Pilgrims. They fled to Massachusetts as well. Later, William Penn founded Pennsylvania as a colony for Quakers, a sect of pacifists. And Maryland began as a place for Catholics to live in safety. 

Another appeal of America was its great size. Because of this, there were opportunities for people to own land. Britain was an island nation that had been populated for centuries. In addition, the king and other nobles owned much of the land. But in America, land was free to anyone who settled it. This appealed to a large number of people. They eagerly sailed to America to claim land for themselves. They built homes and farmed their land. And the crops and animals they raised belonged to them, not to the king or some other noble. 

Finally, in Britain, a person's status almost always depended upon his or her birth. A person born into a noble family often led a life of leisure and wealth. Yet those born to poor farmers or artisans could expect lives of hard work for little reward. At that time, most sons took on their father's professions. Laws and customs usually banned people from leaving their land or even changing jobs. But in the American colonies, there were no restrictions like those. People in America could become anything they wanted. A poor farmer in Britain could become a rich landowner in America. Thus the prospect of improving one's personal welfare appealed to many in Britain. 

For these reasons, people came to America by the shipload. In search of new lives, they rapidly filled up the East Coast. As more people came, they headed further inland and settled the rest of the country. 

