Types of Leaders

A leader is a person who makes decisions for other people. At the highest level are leaders of entire nations. For the most part, there have been three types of leaders of nations. The first are monarchs. These are kings, queens, and other nobles. Second are charismatic leaders who rise to power. They are dictators such as Adolf Hitler of Germany. Third are leaders elected by the people of a nation. The presidents of the United States are examples of these leaders.

For most of history, monarchs ruled the majority of nations. They often wielded absolute power. Those monarchs had complete control over their land. Whatever they said was law. When they died, their son—or perhaps their daughter—took over as the ruler. Some monarchs were beloved by their people. They ruled wisely and were kind leaders. In other cases, some monarchs were so bad that the people overthrew them. This took place in England in the 1600s. It also happened in France during the French Revolution in the late 1700s. In the 1900s, many monarchies were abolished. Others had their power taken away. Some nations, such as England, still have monarchs. Yet they are mere figureheads today.

Charismatic leaders are those that the people love and are willing to follow. They may be elected by the people. But they often take over through force and rule as dictators. Adolf Hitler's political party won control of the German government in the 1930s. Then, Hitler assumed power over the entire country. He and his supporters stopped anyone who got in their way. Josef Stalin of the USSR and Benito Mussolini of Italy are two other charismatic leaders from the 1900s. One advantage of these leaders is that they can easily accomplish certain goals. The legislatures and people are often powerless to stop them. Yet their periods of rule may be unstable or violent times. These dictators often demand too much power. They may start wars and persecute their own people. In many cases, they are overthrown by their citizens or an external power.

Elected leaders are those who win elections that grant them power. The citizens of a country either vote for the person or the individual's political party. The prime minister of Great Britain and the president of the United States are two elected positions. Elected leaders hold power for a limited amount of time. Then, they must win another election to maintain power. This helps limit the leaders' power. Countries with elected leaders often have constitutions. They put specific limits on the power of their leaders. These countries rarely experience civil wars or other periods of instability.

