THE URBAN VISIONARY
A
1.06
62 UNIT 3
B
C
D
When architect and urban planner Richard
Wurman learned that the majority of Earth’s
population lived in cities, he became curious.
He wondered what the effects of global
urbanization will be. With a group of business
and media partners, Wurman set out on a fiveyear study—a project called 19.20.21—to collect
information about urbanization, focusing on
the world’s largest urban concentrations, or
megacities.
The project’s aim is to standardize the
way information about cities—such as health,
education, transportation, energy consumption,
and arts and culture—is collected and shared.
The hope is that urban planners will be able to
use these objective data to enhance the quality
of life for people in cities while reducing the
environmental impact of urbanization.
Q: What draws people to cities?
Wurman: People flock to cities because of
the possibilities for doing things that interest
them. Those interests—and the economics that
make them possible—are based on people living
together. We really have turned into a world of
cities. Cities cooperate with each other. Cities
trade with each other. Cities are where you put
museums, where you put universities, where you
put the centers of government, the centers of
corporations. The inventions, the discoveries,
the music and art in our world all take place
in these intense gatherings of individuals.
Q: Tell us about 19.20.21.
Wurman: For the first time in history, more
people live in cities than outside them. I thought
I’d try to discover what this new phenomenon
really means. I went to the Web, and I tried to
find the appropriate books and lists that would
give me information, data, maps, so I could
understand. And I couldn’t find what I was
looking for. I couldn’t find maps of cities to the
same scale. Much of the statistical information
is gathered independently by each city, and
the questions they ask are often not the same.
There’s no readily available information on the
speed of growth of cities. Diagrams on power,
water distribution and quality, health care, and
education aren’t available, so a metropolis1
 can’t
find out any information about itself relative
to other cities and, therefore, can’t judge the
success or failure of programs.
1A metropolis is a large, important, busy city.
“
One has to understand
[a city’s problems] in context
and in comparison to
other places.
”
PW_RW_SB3_07793_U03_049-072_ptg01.indd 62 11/01/18 3:59 pm
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
So I decided to gather consistent information
on 19 cities that will have more than 20 million
people in the 21st century. That’s what 19.20.21
is about. We’ll have a varied group of young
cities, old cities, third-world cities, secondworld cities, first-world cities, fast-growing
cities, slow-growing cities, coastal cities, inland
cities, industrial cities, [and] cultural cities.
Much of this can be presented online, but
we’re also planning to have exhibits and urban
observatories so that cities around the world
can see themselves relative to others.
Q: What are some of the cities you’re looking at?
Wurman: What inspires me is being able
to understand something, and understanding
often comes from looking at extremes. So the
cities that pop out are the ones that are clearly
the largest, the oldest, the fastest-growing,
the lowest, the highest, the densest, the least
dense, [or] the largest in area. The densest city
is Mumbai. The fastest-growing is Lagos.2
 For
years, the largest city was Mexico City, but
Tokyo is now the biggest … There are cities
that are basically spread out, like Los Angeles.
Then there are classic cities, which you certainly
wouldn’t want to leave out, like Paris. I find the
data on cities to be endlessly fascinating. Just
look at the world’s 10 largest cities through
time. The biggest city in the year 1000 was
Córdoba, Spain. Beijing was the biggest city in
1500 and 1800, London in 1900, New York
City in 1950, and today [it’s] Tokyo.
CITY SOLUTIONS 63
F
2 In 2017, Dhaka was the densest city, and Zinder was the fastestgrowing.
Today, Plaza de la Corredera in
Córdoba is a popular place for
visitors to the city.
E
PW_RW_SB3_07793_U03_049-072_ptg01.indd 63 11/01/18 3:59 pm
Copyright 2018 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
64 UNIT 3
Q: Cities are increasingly challenged to sustain
their infrastructure and service. Can they survive
as they are now?
Wurman: Nothing survives as it is now.
All cities are cities for the moment, and our
thoughts about how to make them better
are thoughts at the moment. There was great
passion 30 years ago for the urban bulldozer,3
that we had to tear down the slums, tear down
the old parts of cities, and have urban renewal.
That lasted for about 10, 15 years, until it
didn’t seem to work very well. And yet the
reasons for doing it seemed justified at that
moment … It shows that the attempt to make
things better often makes things worse. We have
to understand before we act. And although
there are a lot of little ideas for making things
better—better learning, increased safety,
cleaner air—you can’t solve the problem with a
collection of little ideas. One has to understand
them in context and in comparison to other
places.
G
3A bulldozer is a large vehicle used for knocking down buildings.
64 UNIT 3
The Urban Observatory
Wurman’s team has created an interactive
online exhibit called the Urban Observatory.
Hoping to make the world’s data
“understandable and useful,” the website has
maps that compare different cities according
to a variety of themes. These themes include
the types of occupations people have, the
types of transportation available, and the
quality of public spaces, such as parks.