Mastering
Subject
Agricultural Methods in Medieval Europe
I The years after the fifth-century fall of the Roman Empire were dark times
in Europe as the few people scratched out a meager existence from the land, often
barely growing enough food to survive. This changed sometime in the tenth and
eleventh centuries. The medieval European population slowly, but steadily, rose, and
innovative farming methods helped yield greater amounts of food. However, whether
the increase in food caused the growth in population or the growth in population
allowed more food to be cultivated is unclear. Whatever the case, the two went hand-
in-hand and enabled Europe to begin a revival that has never really stopped.
Several factors were involved in increasing agricultural production. First, animal
husbandry produced higher-quality stocks of oxen and horses, which peasant
farmers then utilized to till the land. Animal power from oxen and horses meant
that the thick, heavy, moisture-laden soil in the northern lands could be plowed and
planted. Draft animals could pull heavy wooden and iron plows, some of which had
wheels, thereby allowing for the easier breaking of the fertile ground. New crops,
like oats, with higher energy returns for the amount of labor invested, were planted,
so both peasants and animals enjoyed better diets. Finally, crop rotation systems
were implemented, ensuring that the soil was not depleted of nutrients and enabling
long-term farming in one area. These factors led to more stable lifestyles, the growth
Of urban centers, and a return to more civilized lives.
3 All of these things did not happen overnight though, and historians still
argue over the chronological course of events and which ones had the greatest
impact. The main debate centers on whether having more food permitted a higher
population or if the higher population forced peasants to find ways to grow more
food. The latter seems more logical, and studies of modern subsistence farming
societies in Asia and Africa suggest it is correct. With more mouths to feed, farmers
are forced to find ways to feed them. They either increase their own labor or become
more willing to try unproven ideas to produce more food. As a population increases,
having more people means more labor is available to work the land, build irrigation
systems, raise animals, and do other tasks associated with agriculture.
The exact population of Europe in the tenth century is unknown, but most
estimates put it at around forty million people, the vast majority being peasants who
farmed. Signs of rising populations there do not appear until the eleventh-century
revival of towns and trade. Yet the population did not steadily and continuously
increase until modern times, for war, disease, and famine all took their toll. Famine,
in particular, was a constant threat since increasing numbers meant that whatever
food farmers grew had to sustain more people. In times of poor harvests, the larger
population was a burden, not a benefit, and many died. Despite these occasional
setbacks, the revolution in agriculture was the first step to putting Europe on the
path that eventually led it to dominate the world.
