The Alexandria Museum
Following his conquest of Egypt in 332 B.C., Alexander the Great established a new city, which still exists, on the coastline. He called the city Alexandria, after himself, and then proceeded to invade other lands as laborers constructed the city. Alexander never returned, but one of his generals, Ptolemy, became a pharaoh while establishing a dynasty in Egypt and is reputed to be the founder of the great Alexandria Museum. For more than 500 years, this museum stood as the greatest center of learning in the Western world.
2 The Alexandria Museum was both a library and research center. Scholars advised Ptolemy that the best way to know his kingdom and the people with whom he traded was to establish a center of learning where all of the world's knowledge could be compiled. Egypt was a fortuitous choice as it was a crossroads of many cultures. Once construction was complete, scholars began translating the conquerors' texts from Greek into both Arabic and Hebrew, and men from many cultures and backgrounds gathered to study at the museum. Much of their research centered on math, medicine, astronomy, and geometry.
One of the scholars' initial tasks was to translate the Hebrew texts of the Old Testament into Greek. Ptolemy hired seventy-two Hebrew rabbis to ensure its completion. They were housed in the museum, and all their needs were provided for. • Some historians claim they were treated more like prisoners than scholars, but this was not exactly true. Many scholars lived in the museum, so it is highly unlikely that the rabbis were kept there against their will. Ptolemy also took on another monumental task: He tried to collect as many scrolls and other volumes as he could for the museum. Various reports estimated the museum's holdings at as many as 500,000 scrolls and texts. The librarians divided their works into the main categories of interest of their time, but this in no way resembled any modern form of library cataloging system.
The legacy of the museum cannot be underestimated. Although its great collection was eventually lost—most likely when Muslim invaders conquered the city centuries later—it nevertheless represented the peak of Western thought and scholarship for several centuries. Furthermore, the translation of the Old Testament from Hebrew into Greek is one of its greatest achievements since the Greek translation served as the basis for practically all modern versions of the Old Testament in the Western world.

Glossary
fortuitous: accidental; lucky
underestimated: to be undervalued; to be thought to be less than in reality