
Railroads and the Local Economy
Throughout history, the ease of transportation has been crucial to the placement and growth of population centers. It is no accident that most ancient cities were beside or near major waterways since water transportation was the fastest and best way to travel. Many years later, the Romans built extensive networks of roads throughout Europe, and major settlements grew up alongside them. And although the exploration of North America from the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries followed its rivers and lakes, the vast majority of the continent never truly opened to human habitation until the nineteenth century advent of railroads.
2 Railroads are an offshoot of the steam engines and rail systems which transported coal from mines in England. Later converted to carry people, the first passenger railroad in the United States began operating in 1830. As America grew, so did railroads. A town in the path of railroad construction was fortunate indeed. Railroads brought immigrants to towns, delivered west products from the great eastern cities, and transported east food produced on western farms. Railroad companies were numerous, and they competed for ideal places to lay new tracks and for fees from carrying freight and passengers.
Chicago is a perfect example of how railroads profoundly influenced cities' growth. Ideally situated at the southern end of Lake Michigan, Chicago serves as a gateway between the east and west as well as the northern states of Wisconsin and Minnesota. The first railway opened there in 1838 and helped transform Chicago into a major urban and manufacturing center. The invention of the refrigerated railroad car turned it into a meatpacking hub, and its Union Stock Yards was the world's busiest meatpacking center for decades. Animals came in by rail from the north and west. Then they were slaughtered and processed, and the meat was transported on refrigerated cars to American markets everywhere.
The dream of many American railroad companies was to build a transcontinental railroad. • This desire was realized in 1869 when the final spike that connected two railroads was driven into a track in Utah. From that time, Americans could travel from coast to coast in a few days and could avoid the rough overland trip by covered wagon or the long ocean journey. Ultimately, virtually all corners of the country were connected by railroads. • Even today, railroads are vital to freight transportation despite having been largely replaced by cars and airplanes as passenger carriers in the twentieth century.
Glossary
offshoot: a branch; a result
transcontinental: spanning an entire continent