Star Performer Subject Topics
The Renaissance
After the fifth-century fall of the Roman Empire, Europe
endured several centuries of stagnation now called
the Dark Ages. There were few advances in science
and the arts, and little was done to promote human
knowledge. However, in the thirteenth century, Europe
began changing. This happened first in Italy, where
there was a rebirth—a renaissance—of knowledge and
learning. Indeed, this time would become known as the
Renaissance. Scientists began making discoveries and
exploring the natural world. Ancient Greek and Roman
knowledge once believed lost was found, translated, and
commented and improved upon. Artists experimented
with new styles and forms. Ultimately, the Renaissance
led directly to the Age of Reason and the Industrial
Revolution, both of which are still influencing the world
today.
028
The California Gold Rush
In the late 1840s, the large majority of the American
population lived along the East Coast. Yet a mass
exodus west began in 1849. The reason was that, in
1848, gold was found near John Sutter's mill in the
American River in California. Once news of the
discovery spread, thousands of people made their way
west. In approximately three years' time, the nonnative
American population in California increased from
slightly over 10,000 to a quarter of a million people.
Many prospectors found gold, got rich, and left. Others
found nothing. Yet many stayed and made new lives in
California. This prompted more people to settle in the
west and eventually resulted in the populating of the
country from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans. COO]
D The Influence of the Roman Empire
The Roman Empire, which lasted from around 27 B.C.
until 476 A.D.—and which had been a republic for
500 years prior—was one of history's most influential
empires. While Rome did not avoid making war to defeat
its enemies, it often subsequently brought civilization
to its defeated foes. Enemies were usually not oppressed
but were converted into Roman citizens. Additionally,
Rome's cultural influence was enormous. Its art and
architecture spread widely, and some Roman roads are
still traveled today. Even Rome's language—Latin—
remains used, both in its original form as well as in its
68 PartB
direct descendants: the Italian, Spanish, and French
languages.
Life in the American South after the Civil
War
The Civil War ended in 1865 with the defeat of the South.
The North then faced the issue of how to reintegrate the
South into the country. Thus three major Issues were
dealt with during Reconstruction, which lasted from 1865
to 1877. They were how to rebuild the South, what to do
with the emancipated slaves, and how to punish leading
Southerners like Jefferson Davis and Robert E. Lee.
Ultimately, the South was rebuilt, yet many Southerners
were taken advantage of and mistreated. Freed slaves
were given land, yet racism persisted against them for
decades. And there were no treason trials against leading
Southerners. Reconstruction left mostly bitter memories
for those involved.
B Hellenism
By the time Alexander the Great died in 323 B.C., he
had conquered a huge swath of land in Europe, Asia,
and Africa. Immediately after his death, the period of
Hellenism reigned in these lands. Hellenism arose from
the Greek influence on these places. City-states, such as
Alexandria and Seleucia, were founded in conquered
areas and based on Greek models. Trade flourished in
many places, and there were advances in science, art,
philosophy, and architecture. However, Hellenism was
short-lived, lasting only about 200 years. Alexander's
empire quickly fractured, and wars between rival factions
and outside states led to Hellenism's eventual downfall.
The Brazilian Independence Movement
The nineteenth century—and the late eighteenth century
as well—was a time of revolution not only in Europe
but also in other areas. Brazil was once such place. From
1821 to 1825, the Brazilian independence movement
occurred. Unlike most other though, it was
fought with a minimum of bloodshed. The Brazilians,
led by Dom Pedro, wanted their freedom from Portugal,
their colonial master. Through a series of maneuvers,
set battles were avoided, and, after four years, Portugal
recognized Brazilian independence. Thanks to British
Intervention, the newly freed state was assured that

Portugal would not try to regain its lost colony.
The Role of Geography in the Development
Geography has long played a crucial role in where cities
are founded and in their growth and influence. But cities
can use their geographical location to gain power in
different ways. London, England, sits along the banks
of the River Thames. While it does not adjoin the North
Sea, seafaring ships can still sail up the river to London.
Given England's tradition as a naval power, this enabled
London to become exceedingly important. Paris, France,
meanwhile, has never wielded naval power but has been
a land power instead. Located at a crossroads for routes
north, south, and east, Paris used its geographical setting
to make it powerful on land over the years.
D Northern and Southern Europe in the
Middle Ages
The eleventh and twelfth centuries in Europe are
commonly called the High Middle Ages. In both
Northern and Southern Europe, populations increased,
urbanization took place, and the quality of life in general
improved. However, each region's method of governance
differed. In Northern particularly England and
France, feudalism dominated. A king ruled the land,
and under him were various nobles—dukes, earls, and
barons—who themselves ruled the peasants that lived
on and worked the land. Southern Europe, like in Italy,
eschewed kings and instead centralized power in various
cities. Venice and Florence became two powerful city-
states during this period.
The Effects of Movable Type
035
In 1 352, Johannes Gutenberg, a German, developed
a form of movable type enabling the invention of the
printing press. Its initial effects were to lower the prices
Of books and to increase dramatically the number of
books. Gutenberg's invention quickly spread, thereby
enabling other places to benefit from movable type. First,
the literacy rate in Europe increased. Books were no
longer sole possessions of the wealthy or the Catholic
Church; now, common people were learning to read. This
would directly lead to the sixteenth-century Reformation,
as people began reading the Bible for themselves and,
more importantly, started interpreting it in ways other
than those approved by the Church.
The Development of the Telegraph
The inventing of the telegraph in the mid-nineteenth
century tremendously affected the communications of
the day. Previously, letters or messages took days, weeks,
or even months to be delivered. However, the telegraph
permitted communications to proceed at a much faster
rate. The first public telegram was sent in 1844. After
that, telegraph lines were rapidly set up, first in the
eastern United States and Great Britain. By the 1850s,
people were laying telegraph wires all over the world.
In 1865, a transatlantic cable was successfully set up.
Essentially, the telegraph enabled people to share news
and to transmit messages much quicker than before,
serving to bring people worldwide closer together.
Star Performer Topic Files:
History
The development of moveable type in Europe and China
Italy during the Middle Ages
The history of various Iranian tribes
The effects of the telegraph on the United States and Europe
The events leading up to the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain
The development of China in the twentieth century
The industrialization of the United States in the nineteenth century
The status of women in colonial America
International exchanges between Japan and China
The roles of the state and federal governments the early United States
69