From far out in space, Earth looks like a blue ball. Since water covers three-fourths of the Earth’s surface, blue is the color we see most. The continents look brown, like small islands floating in the huge, blue sea. White clouds wrap around the Earth like a light blanket. The Earth is shaped like a sphere, or a ball. It is 25,000 miles around! It would take more than a year to walk around the whole planet. A spaceship can fly around the widest part of the sphere in only 90 minutes.

Even though spaceships have traveled to the Moon, people cannot visit the Moon without special suits. The moon has no air or water. Plants and animals can’t live there either. Astronauts first landed on the Moon in 1969. After that, there were six more trips to the Moon. They brought back Moon rocks, which scientists are still studying. There are holes, or craters, all over the Moon’s surface. Scientists believe that meteorites smashed into the Moon millions of years ago and formed the craters.

The Sun is the closest star to Earth. A star is a hot ball of burning gas. The Sun looks very big because it is so close. But the Sun is just a medium-sized star. Billions of far-away stars are much bigger than our sun. The burning gases from the Sun are so hot that they warm the Earth from 93 million miles away! Even though the Sun is always glowing, the night here on Earth is dark. That’s because the Earth rotates, or turns around, every 24 hours. During the day, the Earth faces the Sun. Then we see light. During the night, the Earth turns away from the Sun. Then it faces the darkness of space.

Each day we learn more about the Earth, the Moon, and the Sun.
 
1 Why is blue the color we see most when looking at Earth from outer space?

A)	Because most of the Earth is covered in land.
B)	Because the Sun’s ray makes the Earth look blue.
C)	Because most of the Earth is covered in water.
D)	Because clouds wrap around the Earth.

2 The word sphere is closest in meaning to ______ .
A)	ball
B)	shape
C)	roundness
D)	blanket

3 the word formed is closest in meaning to ______.
A)	hit
B)	made
C)	broke
D)	stopped

4 What causes daylight on Earth?
A)	The full Moon causes daylight.
B)	Daylight is caused by the Earth facing away from the Sun
C)	The heat of the Sun’s rays causes daylight.
D)	Daylight is caused by the Earth facing toward the Sun.

5 Which of the following sentences best describes the Sun?
A)	the Sun looks small because it is so far from the Earth
B)	the Sun is a ball of burning gases that gives the Earth heat and light
C)	the Sun is a small star
D)	the Sun is not as hot as it looks.

6 Why did the astronauts bring rocks back from the Moon?
A)	Because they didn’t know if they would return to the Moon every again.
B)	Because they wanted to prove that they wen to the Moon.
C)	Because they wanted to remember how the Moon looked.
D)	Because they wanted to study them and learn more about the Moon.

7 What is the main idea of the article?
A)	Plants and animals cannot live on the Moon.
B)	Without the Sun we would have no heat or light.
C)	We know a lot about the Earth, Moon and Sun, but there is still more to learn.
D)	From outer space, the Earth looks tiny, even though it is thousands of miles around.
