The Sun, Moon and Earth form one of the most special astronomical events which can turn the day into night.

A total solar eclipse is one of the most special and beautiful astronomical events. It occurs when the Moon passes between the Sun and the Earth.

For a short period of time, the Sun is completely blocked out by the Moon when we see from the Earth. Day quickly turns into night. It causes temperatures to drop. Birds stop flying and many animals become worried.

The moon moves around our planet once every 29 and a half days. If you looked at our solar system from above the Earth, you would see that during its movement the Moon passes between Earth and the Sun. If you saw the solar system from the side, however, you would see that the Moon’s movement is not always in line with the Sun and the Earth. That’s why an eclipse doesn’t happen every month.

Approximately once in every seven circle, the Earth, Moon, and Sun will be in a line, and a solar eclipse occurs. The diameter of the Sun is about 400 times larger than that of the Moon, but when you look at the Sun or the Moon from Earth, they appear to be the same size. This is because the Sun is almost 400 times farther away.

Not every solar eclipse is total. If the Sun and the Moon don’t line up perfectly, then only a part of the Sun is covered. This is called a partial solar eclipse. A partial solar eclipse occurs when the Moon does not cover all of the Sun.

Because the Moon and the Earth are always in motion, they can’t keep in one line. That’s why a total solar eclipse doesn’t last forever. In fact, viewed from any one place, it is never longer than seven minutes. However, a partial solar eclipse can often last for over an hour.  
1.	What is the main topic of the passage?
a)	The Sun, Moon and Earth.
b)	Solar Eclipse
c)	Astronomical Events
d)	Solar system

2. the phrase blocked out is closest in meaning to ______.
a)	protected
b)	prevented
c)	covered
d)	viewed

3. According to the passage, what will NOT happen during a total solar eclipse?
a)	Daytime will become shorter.
b)	Temperature will be lower.
c)	Birds will stop flying.
d)	Animals will be worried.

4. What can be inferred about a partial solar eclipse?
a)	It happens every seven years.
b)	It occurs when the Moon doesn’t cover all the sunlight.
c)	It causes the area to be in total darkness.
d)	It can never last longer than seven minutes.
