The Age of Exploration lasted from the early part of
the fifteenth century to the early years of the seventeenth
century. During that time, adventurers from throughout
Europe sailed around the world. The majority of these
ten came from Spain, Portugal, and England. One of the
greatest of all English adventurers during this time was
Sir Francis Drake. He lived from 1540 to 1596. Drake
accomplished a number of feats that led him to be highly
revered in England, yet he was considered a pirate by
people in other countries, particularly Spain.

After the New World was discovered by Christopher Columbus, the Spanish
led the way in establishing colonies there. They were particularly dominant in
Central America and South America. Their soldiers, called conquistadors, effectively defeated the Aztec and Inca empires. On account of their strength in the
New World, the Spanish acquired a great amount of treasure. Thus there were
constantly ships filled with treasure sailing across the Atlantic Ocean to Spain.

Many sailors from other countries tried to capture these ships. Drake was one
of these men. In 1573, he and his crew engaged in an act of piracy against a con
voy of Spanish ships. They managed to capture the ships near Panama. Seizing
their treasure of gold and silver, Drake and his men returned to England. This act
brought him to the attention of Queen Elizabeth. She sponsored another expedition of Drake's that sailed to the New World in 1577, Drake had five small ships
and nearly 200 men. They raided Spanish holdings in South America and then
sailed into the Pacific Ocean, There, Drake captured two Spanish treasure ships
before sailing west across the Pacific. In September 1580, one of Drake's ships
and fifty-six men reached home after having circumnavigated the world.

Drake was knighted by the queen in 1581. By then, he was considered the best
and most daring sailor in England. In 1585, war broke out between England and
Spain. Three years later, King Philip II of Spain sent an enormous fleet, called the
Spanish Armada, to defeat England. Drake was made second in command of the
English fleet that emerged victorious against the Spanish. A few years later, in
1595, Drake returned to the New World. This time, however, his luck ran out. He
caught a disease and died in Panama in January 1596.

What is the passage mainly about?

A) The colonizing of the New World
B) The adventures of Sir Francis Drake
©) Queen Elizabeth and King Philip 11
D) Acts of piracy by Sir Francis Drake

In line 9, the word revered is closest in
meaning to



A) feared
B) famed
C) noticed
D) regarded



. Why does the author mention
conquistadors?
‘A) To explain what the word means
B) To claim that they gathered a great
amount of treasure
C) To note their defeat of two empires
(D) To praise them for their fighting ability

22. According to the author, why did many
sailors attempt to capture Spanish ships?
(A) Their countries were at war with Spain.
(B) They wanted to seize the ships’ treasures.
(C) They desired to enslave the Spanish

sailors.
(D) It was common for ships’ crews to
fight then.

23. What did Sir Francis Drake do in 1580?

(A) He completed a trip around the world,

(B) He destroyed a Spanish convoy in
Panama,

(C) He made plans to
Armada.



fight the Spanish

(D) He attacked Spanish colonies in the
New World.

24, According to the passage, all of the following are mentioned about Sir Francis
Drake EXCEPT
(A) what the name of his ship was
(B) when he was born and died
(©) which country’s sailors he often fought
(D) how various people felt about him

25, What can be inferred from the passage
about the Spanish Armada?
(A) Iesank a large number of English ships
(B) It lose to the English fleet that it fought.
(©) Ihad more ships than any other flet.
(D) Ie was completely destroyed in two
battles

26, In line 32, the phrase ran out is closest in
meaning to
(A) changed
®) escaped
(© removed
(D) ended