The Influence of Humanism on Art and Music 

Humanism is an intellectual movement that began in Italy in the 1300s. Its central idea was that God made the universe but people had to develop and maintain it. To do this, they required a better understanding of the world. They believed that the study of history, gram-mar, poetry, philosophy, and rhetoric was necessary. Humanists looked to the ancient world of Greece and Rome for their ideas. They thought that these societies represented the peak of human achievements. Over time, humanism spread throughout Europe. It had a great impact on people. One of its biggest effects was making Europe a more secular land. 
After the fall of Rome in the fifth century, the Mid-dle Ages began. Many aspects of life in Europe de-clined. These included art and music. During the Middle Ages, artists and musicians were seen as merely work-ers. They worked for the Church and rich nobles. Artists created art for churches while musicians made music for church services. A few rich nobles also paid some artists and musicians to work for them. But humanism changed the situation for artists and musicians. Human-ist ideas helped initiate the Renaissance in the fourteenth century. During that period, the Church became less important. Instead, people began to focus more on secu-lar interests. 
The Renaissance was a crucial time for artists. They rediscovered old ways of painting. They developed more depth in their works. They also learned how to draw people that were anatomically correct. These im-provements came about due to their study of ancient Greek and Roman art forms. Artists such as Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael, and Botticelli were among this new school of artists. They created a new form of art that continues to be admired to this day. 
Renaissance artists were also helped by humanism. Some humanist ideas led to the growth of the merchant class. Previously, the Church had taught that making money was not always a good thing. But the humanists disagreed. They considered making money to be a posi-tive feature. So during the Renaissance, many mer-chants became wealthy. Some of them were interested in acquiring works of art for themselves. They hired struggling artists. This gave many artists a guaranteed source of income. So the artists were able to focus more on developing their work. This improved the overall quality of their art. 
Music, on the other hand, was not influenced by humanism as quickly as was art. Through the Renais-sance, most music was still made for the Church. This trend continued even after that period came to an end. But, in the 1600s and 1700s, music slowly became more secular. There were many popular composers dur-ing this time. Johann Sebastian Bach was one of them. Bach wrote many religious pieces. Yet much of his mu-sic was of a secular nature. The same was true of many other famous composers of this period
