Preventing Biblioemergencies

Before I move next week, I will unwillingly return the books that I have checked out from the library. Sadly, I never even opened a couple of them, and the return of16 them will be painfully abrupt.

I know that I have plenty18 of other books to read. There are at least ten unread books of my own at home and ten more that I'm expecting in the mail. Still, whenever I return a book, I get that feeling of "what if": What if I run out of books?

Some friends of mine recently coined the phrase biblioemergency to describe just such a situation. A biblioemergency is when an avid reader, such as myself, discovers that she has nothing left to read, which19 I know that to some people, that's no big deal, but to me, its20 a disaster.

Ever since childhood, I've made it a point to carry at least21 one21 sometimes two or more, books with me at all times. People ask me why I can't just make do with one book in my bag, or none. But, I always point out, what if I finish them22? What would I do then?

I think this all comes from a habit developed at an early age, due to my parents'23 use of books as pacifiers. Whenever my mother took me to a store or to an appointment, she brought along books. As soon as I got fidgety,24 she'd supply me with a new book to keep me entertained, hopefully until she had finished her business.  Now as an adult, I nevertheless26 find it nearly impossible to wait patiently unless, of course, I have reading material.

[1] When I've run out of books in the past, finding27 myself reading the backs of cereal boxes or the labels on my clothes. [2] Even though I will have to return my books to the library, I plan to packing28 at least four or five in my carry-on luggage, as I do every time I travel. [3] That, my friend, is an experience I never need to repeat. [4] If that sounds like a hassle, imagine the alternative.

16.

F. NO CHANGE
G. returning
H. to have returned
J. returned

17. If the writer were to delete the words unwillingly, sadly, and painfully from this paragraph, the paragraph would primarily lose:

A. evidence undermining the author's later assertion that she loves to read.
B. the sense that the author is unhappy about her move.
C. an explanation of the motive behind the writer's intended actions.
D. its emphasis on the writer's reluctance to lose any books.

18. Which of the following alternatives to the underlined portion would NOT be acceptable?

F. a lot
G. a number
H. numerous
J. a bunch

19.

A. NO CHANGE
B. read.
C. read that
D. read,

20.

F. NO CHANGE
G. theirs
H. they're
J. it's

21.

A. NO CHANGE
B. at least one,
C. at least one:
D. at least one;

22.

F. NO CHANGE
G. the book I'm reading
H. it
J. those

23.

A. NO CHANGE
B. parents
C. parents's
D. parent

24.

F. NO CHANGE
G. I got fidgety
H. After fidgeting,
J. Getting fidgety,

25. At this point, the author is considering adding the following sentence.

The best ones were the ones that had both pictures and words.

If the information is taken to be true, should the author make this addition here?

A. Yes, because it gives more information that is relevant to the previous comment.
B. Yes, because it adds a detail that explains the main idea of the paragraph.
C. No, because it contradicts information given in an earlier paragraph.
D. No, because it is offensive and irrelevant to the passage as a whole.

26.

F. NO CHANGE
G. yet
H. conversely
J. consequently

27.

A. NO CHANGE
B. being that I've found
C. I've found
D. having found

28.

F. NO CHANGE
G. have been packing
H. pack
J. be packing

29. Which of the following sequences of sentences makes this paragraph the most logical?

A. NO CHANGE
B. 2, 4, 1, 3
C. 3, 1, 2, 4
D. 4, 1, 2, 3

30. This question asks about the preceding passage as a whole.

Upon reviewing the essay, the writer is considering removing the final paragraph. Should that paragraph be kept or deleted?

F. Kept, because it returns to the opening idea and provides a conclusion.
G. Kept, because it reveals the writer's true motivation for refusing to return the books.
H. Deleted, because it distracts from the focus of the passage.
J. Deleted, because it repeats information already given without adding any new elements.