The Relationship between Dinosaurs and Birds

The study of dinosaurs began in the 1800s. That was when people started to discover many fossilized dinosaur bones. For decades, paleontologists have thought that dinosaurs were related to modern reptiles. Yet some have a different theory. They believe that dinosaurs have a connection with birds. The basis for this idea is the similar body structures they share. There are even some experts who believe that birds evolved from dinosaurs.

Thomas Huxley, a British scientist, was the first person to declare his belief that birds had evolved from dinosaurs. He noted the similarities between meat-eating dinosaurs and birds. For instance, he pointed out that the leg structures of dinosaurs were similar to those of birds. Then, a fossilized animal with feathers was found in Germany in the middle of the 1800s. Scientists called it Archaeopteryx. It was a known species. At that time, it was classified as a dinosaur. It had teeth, not a beak. It also had claws on its wings. Yet the fossil unearthed in Germany had feathers. This led scientists such as Huxley to believe that it was a bird since they assumed that only birds had feathers. Still, some experts claimed that Archaeopteryx was not a dinosaur even though it lived at the same time as they had.

For the rest of the 1800s, the idea that birds evolved from dinosaurs fell out of favor. Many people came to believe that reptiles and dinosaurs were related instead. But the bird-dinosaur debate began anew in the 1900s. In 1916, a Danish scientist published a book on birds. He mentioned that birds and dinosaurs had similar bone structures. Decades later in the 1960s, the bird-dinosaur theory grew stronger. Many experts started to favor it. They found more fossils. These let them make more comparisons between birds and dinosaurs. One expert pointed out there were twenty-two similarities in the skeletons of carnivorous dinosaurs and birds. The fact that both had fused collarbones was considered a vital sign of their connection.

In recent years, more fossilized birds have been dug up. Many of them date to times when dinosaurs lived. These fossils have given more strength to the idea that birds and dinosaurs shared a common ancestor. Yet there remain many skeptics. They believe that the ability of flight must be considered. They claim that birds evolved from a tree-climbing reptile. That, they say, is how birds learned to fly. They state that birds could not have evolved from ground-based dinosaurs. Nevertheless, the bird- dinosaur theory is becoming more popular. Perhaps one day a fossil may be found that will finally settle the debate.
