The Rise of Factories

The majority of finished products people buy are made in factories. There are few places nowadays where people still make goods in their homes. But this was a common activity in the past. Until the 1700s, there were no factories. However, once the Industrial Revolution began, factories began to open in many places. They radically changed how economies operated.

"Cottage industry" is the term that is used to describe the act of people making things in their homes. In England prior to the Industrial Revolution, almost all products were made in cottage industries. This was especially true of textiles. Textiles are materials used to make clothing. Before the 1700s, people prepared and spun wool and cotton in their homes. This produced yarn, which the people sold to cloth makers. They made large sheets of certain types of cloth out of the yarn. They would leave the cloth plain, dye it, or imprint it. The finished textiles were then sent to tailors, who made clothing.

All of that work was done by hand. It took a long time to prepare the yarn. Carding was one job that people did to prepare the wool and cotton. To do this, the workers had to comb the fibers to remove seeds from the cotton and dirt from the wool. In addition, the workers had to straighten the fibers. This required a lot of time. Entire families were often involved in carding, spinning, and other aspects of making textiles.

Then, factories were founded in England in the 1700s. Textiles were the first major factory-based industry in the world. Inventors made machines that could card and spin yarn much faster than people working in their homes could. Enormous looms were made. These could produce cloth at rapid rates. Steam engines operated much of this machinery. The textile industry swiftly moved from being a cottage- based industry to a factory-based one. This happened in many other industries as well.

Because of factories, countless people working in cottage industries lost their jobs. They often protested against these factories. Some even attacked the factories and wrecked their machinery. But the factories did not go away. They earned huge profits for their owners. Most people had no choice but to work in the factories, so they often moved to where the factories were located. Cities such as Manchester quickly expanded. From England, industrialization spread around the world.

These changes also altered the way in which people lived. In many places, standards of living rose. People earned money from working in the factories, so they could spend it on the new products being made. But the rise of factories had some drawbacks. People lived in crowded cities that were polluted. They spent a lot of time away from their homes, worked long hours, and did dangerous jobs. And the cottage industry, for the most part, completely vanished.
