Finding Historical Sites 

The study of past civilizations is the work of archaeologists. They examine the remains of buildings and artifacts from ancient cultures. But knowing where to search for dig sites is not simple. Many old settlements have disappeared. They have been swallowed by jungles or buried beneath deserts. Wars and natural disasters have destroyed many as well. When selecting places to dig, archaeologists rely upon three main methods. The first is to do research. They read historic records and stories from the past. A The second method is accidental in nature.                oOn occasion, farmers, construction workers, and others find ancient ruins while digging. The third involves guesswork.   aArchaeologists dig in an area where they believe a site is in the hope of finding something. 

A few ancient records describe where certain places were located. This is true of historical records. It is also true of various works of literature. This includes poems and stories. Archaeologists may use them to find lost sites. Arguably the most famous example of this involves the ancient city of Troy. According to the epic poem the Iliad, the Greeks attacked and destroyed Troy in a war that took place thousands of years ago. Most people believed that the story was only a myth. One man, Heinrich Schliemann, did not. He used the Iliad and Homer's other famous work, the Odyssey, as historical documents. Schliemann went to the place in Turkey where Homer said that Troy was. He began digging. He found the remains Of several ancient cities. One of them was later determined to have been the historical Troy. 

Sometimes, people who are digging may find sites by accident. This often happens in cities such as Rome, Athens, and Jerusalem. They are among the oldest cities that are still inhabited. In ancient times, people frequently built new buildings on top of old sites. In the present, builders may uncover them. When this happens, construction there ceases immediately. Archaeologists are brought to the site. They try to learn what they can from it. After they are done, construction may begin anew. 

In a lot of situations, archaeologists do not know precisely where a site is. But they may have a general idea as to its location. Some decide to dig to try to discover the lost site. First, they make a plot of the area. It can cover a small amount of space. Or it can cover a large area of land. Then, the archaeologists begin digging in sections of each plot. If they do not find anything, they go to another area. And they start to dig again. Many times, they search in vain for weeks or months. But if they are lucky, they discover the remains of a past civilization. It takes hard work and perseverance. But this method has resulted in some successes. 
